nanoc 2 is, as of today, no longer maintained. Its successor, nanoc 3, was released more than seven months ago, and if you are still using nanoc 2 you should considering updating your sites to work with nanoc 3. The [migration guide](/docs/9-migrating-to-30/) will be very useful for you when upgrading.

I’ve also taken the time to resolve some issues with gem and executable names. From now on, installing nanoc 2 is done using `gem install nanoc2`. Invoking nanoc 2 is done using `nanoc2` now. Finally, the namespace (module) for nanoc 2 is now called `Nanoc2` instead of `Nanoc`.

The `nanoc` gem is now an alias for the `nanoc3` gem and the `nanoc` executable is can now be used instead of `nanoc3`. In other words, if the gem or executable name does not end with an explicit version, it is an alias for the most recent version.

**How does this change affect you?** If you use nanoc 3, nothing changes. If you use nanoc 2, however, you’ll need to `gem install nanoc2` and use the `nanoc2` executable instead of `nanoc`. In addition to that, any custom code that uses the `Nanoc` module will need to use the `Nanoc2` module instead.

Here’s a summary:

<table>
	<tr class="head">
		<th></th>
		<th>nanoc 2.x</th>
		<th>nanoc 3.x</th>
		<th>latest (currently 3.x)</th>
	</tr>
	<tr class="first">
		<th class="row">gem name</th>
		<td>nanoc2</td>
		<td>nanoc3</td>
		<td>nanoc</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<th class="row">executable name</th>
		<td>nanoc2</td>
		<td>nanoc3</td>
		<td>nanoc</td>
	</tr>
	<tr class="last">
		<th class="row">module name</th>
		<td>Nanoc2</td>
		<td>Nanoc3</td>
		<td>-</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Now, go ahead and install the `nanoc` gem:

<pre><span class="prompt">></span> <kbd>gem install nanoc</kbd></pre>

… and you’ll once again be able to type just `nanoc` instead of `nanoc3` to manage and compile your web site. Ahh, much better.

You can use the `nanoc-select` executable to select a different version of nanoc that will be executed when `nanoc` is run. This is how it works:

<pre>
▸ <kbd>nanoc-select 2</kbd>
Switched to nanoc version 2.

▸ <kbd>nanoc --version</kbd>
nanoc 2.2.3 (c) 2007-2010 Denis Defreyne.
Ruby 1.9.1 (2010-01-10) running on i386-darwin10.2.0

▸ <kbd>nanoc-select 3</kbd>
Switched to nanoc version 3.

▸ <kbd>nanoc --version</kbd>
nanoc 3.0.9 (c) 2007-2010 Denis Defreyne.
Ruby 1.9.1 (2010-01-10) running on i386-darwin10.2.0
</pre>

If you have any questions about this change, of if you have problems getting it to work correctly, do let me know on the [mailinglist](http://groups.google.com/group/nanoc/) or on the [IRC channel](irc://chat.freenode.net/#nanoc"). Enjoy!
