nanoc 3.0 has landed. This release brings many improvements which will be revealed in just a bit, but first, here's how to install it:

	sudo gem install nanoc3

**nanoc 3.0 is incompatible with previous versions of nanoc** which means that you cannot use nanoc 3.0 with existing nanoc 2.x sites. Check out the [migrating from nanoc 2.2 to nanoc 3.0](/migrating/) guide for details on how to upgrade our existing sites.

Fortunately, nanoc 3.0 and 2.2 can coexist; the commandline tool for nanoc 3.0 is named `nanoc3` (not `nanoc`) and the namespace is `Nanoc3`, not `Nanoc`.  You can easily use nanoc 2.2 and nanoc 3.0 side by side.

So, on to what's new in nanoc 3.0. There are too many changes to mention them all, but here's a tiny list of useful new features that I like most:

* **Multiple data sources** so you can load data from multiple locations--for example, Twitter, Delicious and Last.fm.

* **Filter arguments** so you can pass extra arguments when executing a filter. For example, you can now pass Haml options when executing filters, like this: `filter :haml, :format => :html5`.

* **A more compact filesystem-based data source** called `filesystem_combined` that doesn't require tons of directories in the `content` and `layout` directories. Cleaner and less verbose.

* An all-new **dependency tracking system** that ensures that all modified items and their dependent items are recompiled when the site is compiled. This speeds up site compilation by preventing non-modified pages from being recompiled.

* **A rules file** which allows processing instructions (filtering pages, laying out pages) to be specified in a much more DRY way. In addition, the rules file is much more powerful than specifying processing instructions using item/layout attributes.

For more information, check out the [migration guide](/migrating/), as well as the updated [tutorial](/tutorial/) and [manual](/manual/). There is also the [source code documentation for 3.0.0](/doc/3.0.0/) in case you want to take a peek at the internals.

As you can see, a lot has changed in nanoc 3.0. If you experience any problems with this nanoc 3.0, let me know on the [nanoc mailinglist](http://groups.google.com/group/nanoc/) or on the [nanoc IRC channel](irc://chat.freenode.net/#nanoc).

Enjoy!
